***
layout: default
title: Life Expectancy and the Built Environment in St. Louis, MO
description: A machine learning investigation into life expectancy and features of the environment around us in my hometown
***

#Life Expectancy and the Built Environment in Saint Louis, Missouri

Below, you, a constitutuent or resident of the city of Saint Louis, Missouri, will find a tool under development to measure the relationship between public health and the built environment. What is the [built environment](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Built_environment)? The "built environment" a catch-all term for features of your local area, built by humans, for the purposes of work, life, or play. Classic definitions include public parks and public transit, but researchers now include many more quantifiable features, including bicycling, healthy food access, and even mental health. For this tool, I have gathered data on at least seven aspects of the built environment.

It is intuitive and uncontroversial that built environment features have an effect on public health. Proximity to a public park encourages more walking, and more cardiorespiratory fitness is better for public health. This is a burgeoning area of study in public health research, with rigorous tools for quantifying the built environment still being vetted, but scholars have already [noted](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/27755063) effects in public health. The future is certain: more effects, and more specific effects, will be determined in this relationship.

What does that matter to you, a resident of St. Louis, though? First of all, most of these features of the built environment are built and maintained using your public dollars. You deserve the opportunity to see the impact of your (and all of our) spending. Secondly, and more importantly I would argue, we need to shine a light on [disparities](https://www.healthypeople.gov/2020/about/foundation-health-measures/Disparities) in public health, note if there's a relationship with disparities in public investment, and strive to spend the public health dollars of a government "for the people, by the people" on improving the public health of all its constituents.

Specifically, we are measuring the association of the features of the built environment with public health in St. Louis, MO. Public health is life expectancy, in years, measured by the NCHS's USALEEP project for each census tract (see below for links to data). Census tracts are a small geographic unit determined by the [census bureau](https://www2.census.gov/geo/pdfs/reference/GARM/Ch10GARM.pdf); consider that the city of St. Louis, with 300,000+ residents, has 106 census tracts. The built environment is measured through a combination of public or community gardens (both conventional community gardens as well as the city's Milkweed for Monarchs program), public transit (as measured by number of light rail stations in each census tract), length of bike lanes and area of public parks in a census tract, and a scaled score from the EPA measuring "walkability." I have also included a proxy measure of socioeconomic status (SES) because it plays such a large role in this association: percent of the adult population in each census tract without health insurance.